Surf's Up, Surfing the Internet with JAWS, an Introduction    

Surf's Up, Surfing the Internet with JAWS, an Introduction
==========================================================

Surf's Up is a series of web pages that we've created at Freedom Scientific, and they're geared to help you learn how to use the Internet in a safe environment. It's a series of web pages where you can practice learning different techniques and different skills for using JAWS with a web browser. You won't have to worry about getting into any places where you didn't mean to go, or getting into any trouble, or finding yourself lost on a web site. It's a great environment to practice in, and it won't be too much at one time. What we'll be doing throughout the Surf's Up series is introducing concepts or techniques with JAWS, and then we'll use different web pages on the Surf's Up web site to practice those techniques so that you can learn about them, learn how to use them, and then apply them as you start using real web sites.

What is a web browser? A web browser is a program that is designed to let you open and read web pages on the Internet. The web browser is a piece of software, or an app, that runs on your computer, on a smart phone, or on a tablet. In our case, of course, we're talking about the computer. A web browser is a program that understands all the underlying programming codes beneath the surface of the web page and what they mean. The browser displays the web page based on the codes and the instructions built into the web page code. So, a web browser is simply a program that takes a web page, examines its coding, and then displays it visually so that you'll be able to see the text and the pictures and all the different things that the web site designer wanted you to be able to see. There are several different web browsers that people use. The ones we use primarily for training in Windows are Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox. In this basic training I will be using Chrome mostly during the Surf's Up lessons. You can also use Firefox if you like, but in these lessons, I will be using Chrome. One of the questions that we often get is, "Which web browser works the best with JAWS?" And the answer is there are two web browsers that work the best with JAWS, Chrome and Firefox.

The Surf's Up training is organized into several different modules or lessons. Each lesson has skills that you learn about, and then you will practice using those skills on the Surf's Up training web site. Occasionally we may go out to some real-world web sites as well. But each lesson is going to have different skills and you'll build upon them from one lesson to the next.

Accessing the Surf's Up Training Web Site
-----------------------------------------

Since you will be using the Freedom Scientific Surf's Up web site, you first need to know how to find it. There are several different ways, including from a link on the Freedom Scientific training page. I'm going to show you what I think is the easiest way to get to it, and you can do this simply by switching over to the JAWS window. Now keep in mind, of course, for any of this to work you will need to have a computer with an Internet connection. The first thing that you want to do to access the Surf's Up web site is switch to the JAWS window. So, I'm going to go ahead and press **ALT+TAB** until I find the JAWS window on my computer.

And there it is. Next, I'm going to go to the Help menu. I will press **ALT+H** for Help. And now I'm going to scroll down the menu. I am looking for an item called Web Resources submenu. And there it is. I will press the **RIGHT ARROW** key to open the submenu.

Now, I'm going to scroll down some more until I find the item there, Surfing the Internet. I'll go ahead and press **ENTER** on Surfing the Internet. My default web browser, which is Google Chrome, opens to the Surf's Up web site.

I'll press **CTRL** to stop JAWS. Once you do this, JAWS may automatically start reading you this first web page, so you can go ahead and press the **CTRL** key to stop JAWS from reading. We'll pick up here with the opening page and start learning how to use JAWS to navigate the web. But I first wanted to show you how to get to it. So, to recap, you went to the JAWS window, and then to the Help menu. Then you scrolled down to the Web Resources submenu, opened it, and then down to Surfing the Internet. Just for our practice, let's go ahead and close the web browser now. So, I'll press **ALT+F4** now.

Google Chrome closed, and focus is back in the JAWS window. So, that's a very simple way to easily get to the Surf's Up web site.

The Virtual Column or Virtual Buffer
------------------------------------

One concept that you need to understand before you dive in and start using JAWS on the web is the idea of the virtual column or virtual buffer. One of the challenges for those of you who can't see the computer screen and use JAWS to browse the web, is that web pages are often developed with a graphical nature in mind. So, the things that are on the web page may not necessarily be pictures, but a lot of times web pages are built for a visual user experience. So, communication is done by the way things are placed visually, or laid out, on the screen. For example, text that the web site developer wants you to make more note of may be a larger font, or it may be bolded or italicized, or it may be a different color. Things are arranged vertically or horizontally on the screen to convey communication about the importance of those things. So, maybe the web page has multiple columns. Let's say, for example, three columns with one on the left, one in the middle and one on the right. The main content of that page may be in the middle, while the left and right columns may have some navigational information to help you find other parts of the web site. But, nonetheless, that communication visually is done by the way things are arranged on the screen. And if you can't see that, if you can't see the way those things are arranged on the screen then JAWS has to find a way to present that information to you so you can then sift through it and try to find what you are looking for.

The way that JAWS does this is by taking all the information on the web page and displaying it in something that we call the Virtual Buffer. So, think of this as JAWS taking every piece of information, whether it's graphics, or text, or headings, or links, and displaying it all in one giant column. Now, visually nothing happens on the screen when you go to a web site with JAWS. JAWS does this all in the Virtual Buffer, because JAWS is not actually visually changing the way the screen looks. So, if someone's looking at your computer while you're using JAWS on the web, they're not going to see it change all the information into one column. But you're going to treat it as if it were all in one column with JAWS. That way you won't miss things. If you didn't know that the page had three or four columns on it when you got to it, then it might be easy for you to miss things. So, to make it easier for us, JAWS takes all the information on the web page and basically puts it into one giant column that you can then navigate with the different navigational commands that you are about to start learning. So, as you start going through this you will start to learn the most basic ways of navigating the information in this virtual column. And then you'll start to learn some of the different shortcuts, so that if there are parts of the web page that you don't want to read you can use navigational keys to skip over those things and try to find the information that you do want.

Using Surf's Up
---------------

Now that you've gone through some introductions and learned some vocabulary terms, let's dive on in and start to learn how to use JAWS on the web. When you open the Surf's Up web site, take a few minutes to read through the opening page and instructions. You'll find links to several different lessons like an Introduction to Browsing the Web, Web Page Elements, Navigating Web Pages, and much more. In addition, you will find information on JAWS help keystrokes, tabbed browsing, the JAWS key, access keys to navigate by page forward or backward in Surf's Up, and all of this is on just the first page of Surf's Up!

At the bottom of the first page is a link for the next page. Once you have moved forward in the Surf's Up training, the links at the bottom of each page allow you to move either forward or backward. You can also press the web page access keys **ALT+N** to move to the Next page or **ALT+B** to move to the Prior page while in Surf's Up. To return to the Surf's Up home page from any page you have opened, just choose the graphic link at the top of every page for Surf's Up.

We won't cover the individual Surf's Up lessons here in the JAWS Basic Training, but I wanted to get you started and pointed in the right direction. When you are ready, we recommend that you go through each one of the Surf's Up web pages and work through the exercises from beginning to end so you don't miss any of the important concepts. Surfing the Internet with JAWS opens a universe of opportunity! Congratulations! You're on your way!